Context menus migration guide (#8380)
flutter/website: src/release/breaking-changes/context-menus.md

---
title: A new way to customize context menus
description: Several hard-coded parameters for customizing context menus have now been replaced by a generic widget builder.
---

## Summary
Context menus, or text selection toolbars, are the menus that show up when long
pressing or right clicking on text in Flutter, and they show options like Cut,

> Copy, Paste, and Select all. Previously, it was only possible to narrowly
> customize them using ToolbarOptions and TextSelectionControls. Now, they have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Copy**, **Paste**, and **Select all**. Previously, it was only possible to narrowly
customize them using `ToolbarOptions` and `TextSelectionControls`. Now, they have
```

been made composable using widgets, just like everything else in Flutter, and
the specific configuration parameters have been deprecated.

## Context
Previously, it was possible to disable buttons from the context menus using

> TextSelectionControls, but any customization beyond that required copying and
> editing hundreds of lines of custom classes in the framework. Now, all of this
> has been replaced by a simple builder function, contextMenuBuilder, which allows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`TextSelectionControls`, but any customization beyond that required copying and
editing hundreds of lines of custom classes in the framework. Now, all of this
has been replaced by a simple builder function, `contextMenuBuilder`, which allows
```

any Flutter widget to be used as a context menu.

## Description of change

> Context menus are now built via the contextMenuBuilder parameter, which has been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Context menus are now built from the `contextMenuBuilder` parameter, which has been
```

added to all text-editing and text-selection widgets. If one is not provided,
then Flutter just sets it to a default that builds the correct context menu for
the given platform. All of these default widgets are exposed to users for

> re-use. Customizing context menus now consists of using contextMenuBuilder to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
re-use. Customizing context menus now consists of using `contextMenuBuilder` to
```

return whatever widget you want, possibly including reusing the built-in context
menu widgets.

> Here's an example that shows how to add a "Send email" button to the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example that shows how to add a **Send email** button to the default
```

context menus whenever an email address is selected. The full code can be found

> [here](https://github.com/flutter/samples/blob/main/experimental/context_menus/lib/email_button_page.dart).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in [email_button_page.dart]({{site.github}}/flutter/samples/blob/main/experimental/context_menus/lib/email_button_page.dart)
on GitHub.
```

Never never never link on "here".  :D

```dart
TextField(
  contextMenuBuilder: (context, editableTextState) {
    final TextEditingValue value = editableTextState.textEditingValue;
    final List<ContextMenuButtonItem> buttonItems =
        editableTextState.contextMenuButtonItems;
    if (isValidEmail(value.selection.textInside(value.text))) {
      buttonItems.insert(
          0,
          ContextMenuButtonItem(
            label: 'Send email',
            onPressed: () {
              ContextMenuController.removeAny();
              Navigator.of(context).push(_showDialog(context));
            },
          ));
    }
    return AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar.buttonItems(
      anchors: editableTextState.contextMenuAnchors,
      buttonItems: buttonItems,
    );
  },
)
```

A large number of examples of different custom context menus are available [in

> the samples repo](https://github.com/flutter/samples/tree/main/experimental/context_menus).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the samples repo]({{site.github}}/flutter/samples/tree/main/experimental/context_menus).
```

All related deprecated features were flagged with the deprecation warning "Use
`contextMenuBuilder` instead."

## Migration guide
In general, any previous changes to context menus that have been deprecated now

> require the use of the contextMenuBuilder parameter on the relevant text-editing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
require the use of the `contextMenuBuilder` parameter on the relevant text-editing
```

or text-selection widget (

> [on TextField](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/material/TextField/contextMenuBuilder.html),
> for example). Return a built-in context menu widget like
> [AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/material/AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar-class.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[on `TextField`]({{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextField/contextMenuBuilder.html),
for example). Return a built-in context menu widget like
[`AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar`]({{site.api}}/flutter/material/AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar-class.html)
```

to use Flutter's built-in context menus, or return your own widget for something
totally custom.

> To transition to contextMenuBuilder, the following parameters and classes have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To transition to `contextMenuBuilder`, the following parameters and classes have
```

been deprecated.

> ### [ToolbarOptions](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/ToolbarOptions-class.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### [ToolbarOptions]({{site.api}}/flutter/widgets/ToolbarOptions-class.html)
```

This class was previously used to explicitly enable or disable certain buttons

> in a context menu. Before this change, you might have passed it into TextField

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a context menu. Before this change, you might have passed it into `TextField`
```

or other widgets like this:

```dart
// Deprecated.
TextField(
  toolbarOptions: ToolbarOptions(
    copy: true,
  ),
)
```

> Now, you can achieve the same effect by adjusting the buttonItems passed into
> AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar. For example, you could ensure that the Cut button
> never appears, but the other buttons do appear as usual:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you can achieve the same effect by adjusting the `buttonItems` passed into
`AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar`. For example, you could ensure that the **Cut** button
never appears, but the other buttons do appear as usual:
```

```dart
TextField(
  contextMenuBuilder: (context, editableTextState) {
    final List<ContextMenuButtonItem> buttonItems =
        editableTextState.contextMenuButtonItems;
    buttonItems.removeWhere((ContextMenuButtonItem buttonItem) {
      return buttonItem.type == ContextMenuButtonType.cut;
    });
    return AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar.buttonItems(
      anchors: editableTextState.contextMenuAnchors,
      buttonItems: buttonItems,
    );
  },
)
```

> Or, you could ensure that the Cut button appears exclusively and always:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or, you could ensure that the **Cut** button appears exclusively and always:
```

```dart
TextField(
  contextMenuBuilder: (context, editableTextState) {
    return AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar.buttonItems(
      anchors: editableTextState.contextMenuAnchors,
      buttonItems: <ContextMenuButtonItem>[
        ContextMenuButtonItem(
          onPressed: () {
            editableTextState.cutSelection(SelectionChangedCause.toolbar);
          },
          type: ContextMenuButtonType.cut,
        ),
      ],
    );
  },
)
```

> ### [TextSelectionControls.canCut](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/TextSelectionControls/canCut.html) and other button booleans

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### [TextSelectionControls.canCut]({{site.api}}/flutter/widgets/TextSelectionControls/canCut.html) and other button booleans
```

These booleans previously had the same effect of enabling and disabling certain

> buttons as ToolbarOptions.cut, etc. had. Before this change, you might have been
> hiding and showing buttons by overriding TextSelectionControls and setting these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
buttons as `ToolbarOptions.cut`, and so on had. Before this change, you might have been
hiding and showing buttons by overriding `TextSelectionControls` and setting these
```

Author: I was really watching my "i.e."s and "e.g."s, but I forgot about "etc." :)

booleans like this:

```dart
// Deprecated.
class _MyMaterialTextSelectionControls extends MaterialTextSelectionControls {
  @override
  bool canCut() => false,
}
```

> See the previous section on ToolbarOptions for how to achieve a similar effect
> with contextMenuBuilder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the previous section on `ToolbarOptions` for how to achieve a similar effect
with `contextMenuBuilder`.
```

> ### [TextSelectionControls.handleCut](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/TextSelectionControls/handleCut.html) and other button callbacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### [TextSelectionControls.handleCut]({{site.api}}/flutter/widgets/TextSelectionControls/handleCut.html) and other button callbacks
```

These functions allowed the modification of the callback called when the buttons
were pressed. Before this change, you might have been modifying context menu
button callbacks by overriding these handler methods like this:

```dart
// Deprecated.
class _MyMaterialTextSelectionControls extends MaterialTextSelectionControls {
  @override
  bool handleCut() {
    // My custom cut implementation here.
  },
}
```

> This is still possible using contextMenuBuilder, including calling
> out to the original buttons' actions in the custom handler, using toolbar
> widgets like AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar.buttonItems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is still possible using `contextMenuBuilder`, including calling
out to the original buttons' actions in the custom handler, using toolbar
widgets like `AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar.buttonItems`.
```

> This example shows modifying the Copy button to show a dialog in addition to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows modifying the **Copy** button to show a dialog in addition to
```

```dart
TextField(
  contextMenuBuilder: (BuildContext context, EditableTextState editableTextState) {
    final List<ContextMenuButtonItem> buttonItems =
        editableTextState.contextMenuButtonItems;
    final int copyButtonIndex = buttonItems.indexWhere(
      (ContextMenuButtonItem buttonItem) {
        return buttonItem.type == ContextMenuButtonType.copy;
      },
    );
    if (copyButtonIndex >= 0) {
      final ContextMenuButtonItem copyButtonItem =
          buttonItems[copyButtonIndex];
      buttonItems[copyButtonIndex] = copyButtonItem.copyWith(
        onPressed: () {
          copyButtonItem.onPressed();
          Navigator.of(context).push(
            DialogRoute<void>(
              context: context,
              builder: (BuildContext context) =>
                const AlertDialog(
                  title: Text('Copied, but also showed this dialog.'),
                ),
            );
          )
        },
      );
    }
    return AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar.buttonItems(
      anchors: editableTextState.contextMenuAnchors,
      buttonItems: buttonItems,
    );
  },
)
```

A full example of modifying a built-in context menu action can be found in the

> samples repository
> [here](https://github.com/flutter/samples/blob/main/experimental/context_menus/lib/modified_action_page.dart).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
samples repository, in [email_button_page.dart]
({{site.github}}/flutter/samples/blob/main/experimental/context_menus/lib/modified_action_page.dart).
```

> ### [buildToolbar](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/TextSelectionControls/buildToolbar.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### [`buildToolbar`]({{site.api}}/flutter/widgets/TextSelectionControls/buildToolbar.html)
```

> This function generated the context menu widget similarly to contextMenuBuilder,
> but required much more setup to work with. Before this change, you might have
> been overriding buildToolbar as a part of TextSelectionControls, like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function generated the context menu widget similarly to `contextMenuBuilder`,
but required more setup to use. Before this change, you might have
been overriding `buildToolbar` as a part of `TextSelectionControls`, like this:
```

```dart
// Deprecated.
class _MyMaterialTextSelectionControls extends MaterialTextSelectionControls {
  @override
  Widget buildToolbar(
    BuildContext context,
    Rect globalEditableRegion,
    double textLineHeight,
    Offset selectionMidpoint,
    List<TextSelectionPoint> endpoints,
    TextSelectionDelegate delegate,
    ClipboardStatusNotifier clipboardStatus,
    Offset lastSecondaryTapDownPosition,
  ) {
    return _MyCustomToolbar();
  },
}
```

> Now you can simply use contextMenuBuilder directly as a parameter to TextField
> (and others). The information provided in the parameters to buildToolbar can be
> obtained via the EditableTextState that is passed to contextMenuBuilder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can simply use `contextMenuBuilder` directly as a parameter to `TextField`
(and others). The information provided in the parameters to `buildToolbar` can be
obtained from the `EditableTextState` that is passed to `contextMenuBuilder`.
```

    required this.anchor,
    required this.children,
  });

  final Offset anchor;
  final List<Widget> children;

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Stack(
      children: <Widget>[
        Positioned(
          top: anchor.dy,
          left: anchor.dx,
          child: Container(
            width: 200.0,
            height: 200.0,
            color: Colors.amberAccent,
            child: Column(
              children: children,
            ),
          ),
        ),
      ],
    );
  }
}

class _MyTextField extends StatelessWidget {
  const _MyTextField();

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return TextField(
      controller: _controller,
      maxLines: 4,
      minLines: 2,
      contextMenuBuilder: (context, editableTextState) {
        return _MyContextMenu(
          anchor: editableTextState.contextMenuAnchors.primaryAnchor,
          children: AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar.getAdaptiveButtons(
            context,
            editableTextState.contextMenuButtonItems,
          ).toList(),
        );
      },
    );
  }
}
```

A full example of building a custom context menu can be found in the samples

> repository
> [here](https://github.com/flutter/samples/blob/main/experimental/context_menus/lib/custom_menu_page.dart).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
repository, [custom_menu_page.dart]
({{site.github}}/flutter/samples/blob/main/experimental/context_menus/lib/custom_menu_page.dart).
```

## Timeline

Landed in version: 3.6.0-0.0.pre<br>
In stable release: 3.7.0

## References

API documentation:

* [`TextField.contextMenuBuilder`] {{site.api}}/flutter/material/TextField/contextMenuBuilder.html
* [`AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar`] {{site.api}}/flutter/material/AdaptiveTextSelectionToolbar-class.html

Relevant issues:

> * [Simple custom text selection toolbars] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/73574
> * [Right click menu outside of text fields] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/98272
> * [Text editing for desktop - stable] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/90563
> * [Ability to disable context menu on TextFields] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/79796
> * [Missing APIs for text selection toolbar styling] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/22210
> * [Enable copy toolbar in all widgets] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/49996
> * [Disable context menu from broser] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/78671
> * [Custom context menus don't show up for Flutter web] {{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/84219

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Simple custom text selection toolbars]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/73574)
* [Right click menu outside of text fields]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/98272)
* [Text editing for desktop - stable]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/90563)
* [Ability to disable context menu on TextFields]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/79796)
* [Missing APIs for text selection toolbar styling]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/22210)
* [Enable copy toolbar in all widgets]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/49996)
* [Disable context menu from browser]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/78671)
* [Custom context menus don't show up for Flutter web]({{site.repo.flutter}}/issues/84219)
```

Relevant PRs:

> * [ContextMenus] {{site.repo.flutter}}/pull/107193
> * [Ability to disable the browser's context menu on web] {{site.repo.flutter}}/pull/118194
> * [Ability to disable the browser's context menu on web (engine)] {{site.repo.engine}}/pull/38682
> * [Custom context menus in SelectableRegion on web] {{site.repo.flutter}}/pull/121653

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [ContextMenus]({{site.repo.flutter}}/pull/107193)
* [Ability to disable the browser's context menu on web]({{site.repo.flutter}}/pull/118194)
* [Ability to disable the browser's context menu on web (engine)]({{site.repo.engine}}/pull/38682)
* [Custom context menus in SelectableRegion on web]({{site.repo.flutter}}/pull/121653)
```
